# Chapter 29: And Not In Self

_"My sinful nature does not contain any good." Romans 7:18_

Only God and His Son have life in themselves. To seek life in God instead of ourselves is the highest honor of a creature. To live for ourselves is the foolishness and sin of mankind; to live for God in Christ is the blessing of a believer. To deny, hate, forsake, and lose our own life is the secret of living by faith. "I live, but not by my own power; Christ lives in me" and "Not by my own strength, but by the grace of God that is with me" are the testimonies of those who have given up their own lives and accepted the life of Christ within them. The only way to true life and to remain in Christ is the path He showed us: through death.

At the start of the Christian life, few understand this. They rejoice in being forgiven and trust God to help them live for Him. They are unaware of the hostility of the flesh against God and its refusal to obey God's law. They don't yet know that only death, the complete surrender of all that is natural, will allow God's life to be powerfully revealed in them. But soon, through bitter failure, they learn that what they know of Christ's power to save is not enough and deep desires are stirred to know Him better. He lovingly directs them to His cross. He tells them that, just as they found their right to life through faith in His death as their substitute, so they will also experience it more fully there. He asks if they are willing to drink from the same cup He did: to be crucified and die with Him. He teaches them that, even though they didn't realize it, when they became believers they were already crucified and dead in Him. But what they need now is to give a full and conscious agreement to what they accepted before they understood it, by an act of their own will to die with Christ.

This demand of Christ's is of the utmost importance. Many believers are hesitant to accept it. They are so used to living a life of sin that they don't even want to think about being freed from it. Holiness, complete obedience to Jesus, and an unbroken connection to His love are not even part of their belief system. If they don't have a strong desire to stay away from sin and to be united with the Savior, then the idea of being crucified with Him is inconceivable. Those who are truly trying to stay in Christ, however, have a different outlook. They have learned through hard experience that their biggest obstacle in living a holy life is themselves. They are unwilling to give up their will and their own efforts often get in the way of God's work. Unless self is replaced by Christ's life, with His will and actions, then abiding in Him will be impossible. Then comes the serious question from Him who died on the cross: "Are you ready to give up self to the death?" You are already dead to sin and alive to God, but are you ready to put your members to death, to give up yourself completely to its death on the cross, and to stay there until it is completely destroyed? This is a difficult question. Am I prepared to say that my old self will no longer have any say; that it will not be allowed to have a single thought, however natural--not a single feeling, however gratifying--not a single wish or work, however right?

Is this really God's requirement? Isn't our nature God's creation and can't our natural abilities be devoted to His service? Yes, they can and must be. But, you may not have realized that the only way to do this is to take away the power of self and give it to the life of Christ. Don't think that you can do this just because you are one of His redeemed and you really want to. No, the only way to the altar of devotion is through death. Just as you offered yourself as a living sacrifice to God (Romans 6:13, 7:1), each of your abilities, talents, and possessions that are meant to be holy to the Lord must be taken away from the power of sin and self and be placed on the altar to be consumed by the fire that is always burning there. It is through the killing of self that the amazing abilities God has given you to serve Him can be released to give a full surrender to God, be accepted, and be used for His service. Even though you will never be able to say that self is dead while you are still alive, when the life of Christ is allowed to take full control, self can be kept in its place of crucifixion and under its sentence of death so that it won't have any power over you, not even for a second. Jesus Christ will become your second self.

Believer! If you want to truly and fully remain in Christ, you must be ready to completely leave behind your own self and never allow it to have any influence over your inner life. If you are willing to completely turn away from yourself and let Jesus Christ become your life within you, guiding your thoughts, feelings, and actions in both spiritual and temporal matters, He is ready to take charge. In the fullest and widest sense, He will be your life, His interest and influence extending to every single one of the thousands of things that make up your daily life. All He asks of you is to come away from yourself and your own life, remain in Christ and the Christ life, and Christ will be your life. The power of His holy presence will expel the old life.

In order to accomplish this, give up self completely and forever. If you have been too afraid to do so before, do it now, trusting in Christ's promise that His life will take the place of the old one. Understand that although self is still alive, it has no power over you. Your new nature, created in Jesus Christ, has freed you from the control of self. Self can only have authority over you if you, out of ignorance, carelessness, or disbelief, allow it. Believe in the incredible position you have in Christ. As one who has a life dead to self and is liberated from its dominion, have the courage to put your foot on the neck of this enemy of yours and your Lord's. Be courageous and have faith; do not be afraid to take the irreversible step and say that you have given up self to death, as it has been crucified in Christ (Romans 6:6). Rely on Jesus the Crucified One to keep self on the cross and to fill its place in you with His own resurrection life.

Remain in faith and trust in Christ. Cling to Him, rely on Him, and hope in Him. Renew your commitment to Him each day, and accept your new life as one who has been redeemed from a tyrant and now has the power to conquer. Be vigilant and wary of the enemy, the self, which will try to escape the cross and deceive you into giving it freedom. Remember, self-seeking to serve God is more dangerous than self-refusal. Hide in Christ for safety and He will teach you to be humble, watchful, happy, and trusting. Bring all aspects of your life to Him and trust Him to take the place of self. Jesus Christ will take possession of you and live in you, and you will experience peace, grace, and joy from the exchange of self for Him.

_Note:_

_In his book on Sanctification, Marshall emphasizes the danger of Christians seeking holiness through their own power and the help of Christ, instead of relying solely on Christ and receiving it through faith. He reminds us that believers have two natures, and thus two ways of seeking holiness. The carnal way is when we make our own efforts and resolutions, trusting that Christ will help us. The spiritual way is when, as those who have died to self, we receive Christ daily and allow Him to live and work in us._

_"Give up trying to cleanse your flesh or natural self of its sinful desires and tendencies, and attempting to live a holy life through your own willing and determination to do the best you can, relying on the grace of God and Christ to assist you in such intentions and efforts. Instead, resolve to trust in Christ to work in you to will and to do by His own power according to His own good pleasure. Those who are aware of their own sin and misery usually first attempt to tame the flesh, and to subdue and eliminate its desires, and to make their corrupt nature more inclined to holiness through their struggles and wrestling with it; and if they can just bring their hearts to a full purpose and determination to do the best they can, they hope that by such a resolution they will be able to accomplish great feats in the conquest of their desires and performance of the most difficult duties. It is the great work of some passionate preachers and writers to stir people up to this resolution, where they place the main turning point from sin to godliness. And they think that this is not contrary to the life of faith, because they trust in the grace of God through Christ to help them in all such intentions and efforts. Thus they strive to reform their old state, and to be made perfect in the flesh, instead of putting it off and walking in accordance with the new state in Christ. They rely on lowly carnal things for holiness, and on the actions of their own will, their goals, intentions, and efforts, instead of Christ; and they trust in Christ to help them in this carnal way; whereas true faith would teach them that they are nothing, and that they are only laboring in vain."_

