# Chapter 30: As The Surety of the Covenant

_"Jesus was a guarantee of a better covenant." Hebrews 7:22_

Regarding the old Covenant, Scripture speaks of it as being imperfect, and God expresses His displeasure that Israel had not kept it; so He paid them no heed (Heb. 8:7-9). It had not achieved its goal of uniting Israel and God: Israel had abandoned Him, and He had abandoned Israel. Therefore, God promises to make a New Covenant, free from the faults of the first, and successful in achieving its purpose. In order to fulfill its purpose, it would need to ensure God's faithfulness to His people, and His people's faithfulness to God. The terms of the New Covenant explicitly state that these two objectives will be achieved. "I will put my laws into their minds": thus God pledges to guarantee their unwavering faithfulness to Him. "I will remember their sins no more" (see Heb. 8:10-12): thus He guarantees His unceasing faithfulness to them. A forgiving God and a devoted people: these are the two parties who will meet and be eternally connected in the New Covenant.

The New Covenant has the most beautiful assurance: Jesus is the guarantee that it will be fulfilled on both sides. He became the guarantee that God would faithfully keep His promises to forgive, accept, and never leave us. And He also became the guarantee that we would faithfully keep our promises to God so that He could bless us. Jesus fulfills His guarantee in two ways: as one with God, He is our assurance that God will do what He has promised. Everything God has is secure in Him as a human. And as one with us, He is God's assurance that His interests will be taken care of. Everything we must be and do is secure in Him. The New Covenant has the living guarantee of the God-man, which is its everlasting security. As we stay in Him as the guarantee of the Covenant, its promises and blessings will be realized in us.

We can gain a better understanding of this if we look at it in the light of a promise from the New Covenant. For example, Jeremiah 32:40 says, "I will make with them an everlasting covenant, that I will not turn away from doing good to them; and I will put the fear of me in their hearts, that they may not turn away from me."

God's incredible love for us is so humbling! He is always faithful and true, and yet He goes even further to prove His unwavering commitment to us by making an everlasting covenant. He promises, "I will make an everlasting covenant, that I will not turn away from them." How blessed is the person who takes this to heart and finds peace in God's unchanging covenant!

In a covenant, there are two parties. But what if man is unfaithful and breaks the covenant? To make sure the covenant is secure, something must be done to ensure that man remains faithful. Man can't guarantee this. So God steps in to provide for this. He promises to never turn away from His people and to put His fear in their hearts so that they don't depart from Him. As part of the covenant, God promises to cause His people to follow His statutes and keep His judgments (Ezekiel 36:27). How blessed is the man who understands this part of the covenant! He knows his security doesn't come from the covenant he makes with God, which he would only break again. He realizes that God has made a covenant in which He stands good for both Himself and man. He grasps the truth that his part in the covenant is to accept what God has promised to do and to expect that He will fulfill His promise to ensure His people's faithfulness to Him: "I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me."

The Father has appointed a surety in the covenant, to ensure its perfect fulfillment. He has said, "I have given you as a covenant to the people." The Holy Spirit testifies, "All the promises of God are yes in Him, and in Him Amen, to the glory of God by us." Those who remain in Him have a divine assurance that every promise of the covenant will be fulfilled.

Jesus was appointed as the guarantor of a better covenant. He is our Melchizedek, and it is testified that He lives (Hebrews 7). Aaron and his sons passed away, but Jesus has an unending life and an unchangeable priesthood. Because He lives forever, He is able to save completely. His suretyship of the covenant is so effective because He lives eternally to intercede for us. His holy presence continually pleads with the Father on our behalf, granting us the powers and blessings of the heavenly life. His ongoing intercession sends us the unceasing power of the heavenly life. As our guarantor with the Father, He never stops praying and presenting us before Him, and as our guarantor with us, He never stops working and revealing the Father within us.

The mystery of the Melchisedec priesthood, which the Hebrews were not able to receive (Hebrews 5:10-14), is the mystery of resurrection life. This is where the glory of Christ as the guarantor of the covenant lies: He lives forever. He works in heaven with the strength of a divine, omnipotent life. He is always praying, never ceasing to lift up prayers to God to ensure that the Father fulfills His promises to us. He also works on earth with the same life, never ceasing to send down answered prayers--the powers of the heavenly world--to guarantee our fulfillment of the covenant. In this eternal life, there are no breaks, no interruption; each moment has the power of eternity in it. He is always, every moment, praying and blessing. He can save completely and perfectly because He is always praying.

Believer! Come and see how Jesus' ever-living priesthood secures the possibility of abiding in Him every moment. As His intercession rises up, its power descends. Jesus stands good for the covenant He made--"I will put my fear in their heart, and they shall not depart from me"--so He cannot leave you for even a moment. Your unbelief may prevent you from receiving the blessing, but He will never be unfaithful. If you consider Him and the power of His endless life, your faith will rise to believe that an endless, ever-continuing, unchangeable life of abiding in Jesus is yours.

As we come to understand who Jesus is and what He is to us, abiding in Him will become a natural and effortless result of our knowledge of Him. If His life is constantly rising to the Father for us and descending to us from the Father, then abiding in Him moment by moment is easy. Each moment of being in His presence we can say, "Jesus, my surety, keeper, and ever-living Savior, in whose life I dwell, I abide in You." Whenever we feel need, darkness, or fear, we can say, "O great High Priest, with the power of an endless, unchanging life, I abide in You." And when we need to do other things, we can trust that His suretyship, His unceasing priesthood, and His power to save us completely will keep us abiding in Him.

